rlwrap(1)              General Commands Manual             rlwrap(1)

NAME
       rlwrap - readline wrapper

SYNOPSIS
       rlwrap [rlwrap-options] command ...

DESCRIPTION
       rlwrap runs the specified command, intercepting user input in
       order to provide readline's line editing, persistent  history
       and completion.

       rlwrap tries (and almost succeeds) to be completely transpar‐
       ent - you (or your shell) shouldn't notice any difference be‐
       tween  command and rlwrap command - except the added readline
       functionality, of course.  This should even  hold  true  when
       you  are re-directing, piping and sending signals from and to
       command, and when command manipulates its  terminal  settings
       or working directory.

       There are many options to add (programmable) completion, han‐
       dle multi-line input, colour and  re-write  prompts.  If  you
       don't  need  them  (and you probably don't), you can skip the
       rest of this manpage.

OPTIONS
       -a, --always-readline [password_prompt]
              Always remain in "readline mode", regardless  of  com‐
              mand's terminal settings.  Use this option if you want
              to use rlwrap with commands that already do some  line
              editing.   NB: With this option, rlwrap will echo (and
              save) passwords, unless you  give  command's  password
              prompt  as  an argument.  The argument is optional; if
              given, it has to directly follow the  option   without
              an intervening space.

              On  a linux machine you can use the -N (--no-children)
              option to avoid wrapping  pagers  and  editors  called
              from command; this should make them much more usable

              Many  commands  that  need  --always-readline may also
              need -t dumb to  prevent  terminal  control  sequences
              from  confusing  rlwrap  (although this will annoy the
              above-mentioned pagers and editors)

       -A, --ansi-colour-aware
              Prompts that use colour  will  confuse  rlwrap,  espe‐
              cially  at  the  end  of long input lines. This option
              will make rlwrap better behaved in such cases.  If the
              prompt  contains  anything  fancier  than  ANSI colour
              codes, this option may actually make things worse.

       -b, --break-chars list_of_characters
              Consider  the   specified   characters   word-breaking
              (whitespace  is always word-breaking). This determines
              what is considered a "word", both when completing  and
              when building a completion word list from files speci‐
              fied by -f options following (not preceding!) it.  De‐
              fault  list (){}[],'+-=&^%$#@"";|\ Unless -c is speci‐
              fied, / and . (period) are  included  in  the  default
              list.

       -c, --complete-filenames
              Complete  filenames  (filename  completion  is  always
              case-sensitive, even with the -i option). On Linux, OS
              X,  FreeBSD and Solaris rlwrap will keep track of com‐
              mand's working directory, so that  relative  filenames
              will be completed as one would expect.

       -C, --command-name command_name|N
              Use  command_name  instead of command to determine the
              names of history and completion  files,  and  to  ini‐
              tialise  readline  (as specified in ~/.inputrc). A nu‐
              meric argument N >  0  means:  use  the  Nth  argument
              counting backwards from the end of the argument list

       -D, --history-no-dupes n
              How  aggressively  to  weed out duplicate entries from
              the input history.  If n = 0, all inputs are  kept  in
              the  history list, if n = 1 (this is the default) con‐
              secutive duplicates are dropped from the list, while n
              =  2 will make rlwrap drop all previous occurrences of
              the current input from the list.

       -e, --extra-char-after-completion char
              By default, rlwrap appends a space after any  inserted
              completion  text. Use this option to change this to ''
              (don't insert anything) or some other character.

       -f, --file file
              Split file into words (using the default word-breaking
              characters,  or those specified by --break-chars), and
              add them to the completion word list. This option  can
              be  given more than once, and adds to the default com‐
              pletion  list  in   $RLWRAP_HOME   or   /usr/share/rl‐
              wrap/completions.

              Specifying  -f . will make rlwrap use the current his‐
              tory file as a completion word list.

       -g, --forget-matching regexp
              Forget (i.e. never put into the history list) all  in‐
              put  lines that match the POSIX 1003.2 regular expres‐
              sion regexp.  The match  is  always  case-insensitive.
              regexp may be an ordinary string. For more about regu‐
              lar expressions, see  regex (7)

       -h, --help
              Print a short help message.

       -H, --history-filename file
              Read command history  from file  (and  write  it  back
              there if --histsize >= 0)

       -i, --case-insensitive
              Ignore  case  when completing (filename completion re‐
              mains case-sensitive). This option has to come  before
              any -f options.

       -I, --pass-sigint-as-sigterm
              Send  a TERM signal to command when an INT is received
              (e.g. when you press CTRL-C).

       -l, --logfile file
              When in readline mode, append  command's  output  (in‐
              cluding  echo'ed  user  input)  to file (creating file
              when it doesn't exist).

       -n, --no-warnings
              Don't print warnings.

       -N, --no-children
              Don't rlwrap command's children: whenever  rlwrap  no‐
              tices that command is waiting for one of its children,
              it switches to direct  mode,  handing  down  all  key‐
              presses  immediately.   With this option commands that
              need --always-readline can call editors and pagers and
              still be usable.

              This  option needs /proc/command_pid/wchan, so it only
              works with linux kernels configured with  CONFIG_KALL‐
              SYMS.

       -m, --multi-line [newline_substitute]
              Enable  multi-line  input using a "newline substitute"
              character sequence (" \ ", [space-backslash-space]  by
              default).  Newline  substitutes are translated to new‐
              lines before sending the input to command.  With  this
              option, you can call an external editor $RLWRAP_EDITOR
              on  the  (expanded)  current  input   with   the   rl‐
              wrap_call_editor  key (CTRL-^ by default) The argument
              is optional; if given, it has to directly  follow  the
              option  without an intervening space.

       -M, --multi-line-ext .ext
              Call  multi-line-editor  on temporary files with file‐
              name extension .ext (useful for e.g. automatic  syntax
              colouring)

       -o, --one-shot
              Send  an EOF to command after accepting the first line
              of input

       -O, --only-cook regexp
              Only ever "cook" prompts that match regexp

       -p, --prompt-colour [colour_name|Colour_name|colour_spec]
              Use one of the colour names black, red, green, yellow,
              blue,   cyan,   purple  (=magenta)  or  white,  or  an
              ANSI-conformant <colour_spec>  to  colour  any  prompt
              displayed by command. An uppercase colour name (Yellow
              or YELLOW ) gives a bold prompt.  Prompts that already
              contain  (colour) escape sequences or one of the read‐
              line "ignore markers" (ASCII 0x01 and  0x02)  are  not
              coloured.  This  option  implies  --ansi-colour-aware.
              colour spec has the form  <attr>;<fg>[;<bg>]  Example:
              -p'1;31'  will  give  a bold red prompt on the current
              background (this is the default when  no  argument  is
              given).  Google  for  'ANSI color' to learn more about
              colour codes.  The argument is optional; if given,  it
              has  to  directly follow the option  without an inter‐
              vening space.

       -P, --pre-given text
              Start rlwrap with  text in its edit buffer (this  will
              automatically set the --always-readline option).

       -q, --quote-characters list_of_characters
              Assume  that  the given characters act as quotes, e.g.
              when matching parentheses. Take  care  to  escape  the
              list properly for your shell (example: -q "\"'", which
              happens to be the default, or -q "\""  which  will  be
              better for lisp-like input)

       -r, --remember
              Put all words seen on in- and output on the completion
              list.

       -R, --renice
              Make rlwrap nicer than command (cf nice (1)). This may
              prevent  rlwrap from interrupting command to display a
              prompt when command is still "thinking" about what  to
              output next.

       -s, --histsize N
              Limit  the  history  list to N entries, truncating the
              history file (default: 300). A negative size -N  (even
              -0)  means  the same as N, but treats the history file
              as read-only.

       -S, --substitute-prompt prompt
              Substitute the specified  prompt  for   command's  own
              prompt.  Mainly  useful  when   command doesn't have a
              prompt.

       -t, --set-term-name name
              Set command's TERM to name. Programs that confuse  rl‐
              wrap  with fancy screen control codes can sometimes be
              tamed by specifying -t dumb

       -U, --mirror-arguments
              (linux only) Keep track of command's arguments as seen
              by the ps (1) command, and mirror them in rlwrap's own
              arguments This is  mainly  useful  for  commands  that
              overwrite  command-line  password arguments that would
              be exposed by rlwrap without this option.

       -v, --version
              Print rlwrap version.

       -w, --wait-before-prompt timeout
              In order to determine if  command's last output  is  a
              prompt,  rlwrap  waits  timeout milliseconds after re‐
              ceiving it.  Only when no more output has arrived,  it
              is  cooked  (coloured,  filtered  and/or replaced by a
              substitute prompt) and displayed as a prompt.   Before
              this  the  prompt  is displayed "uncooked". Most users
              won't notice, but heavy cookers can prepend the  time‐
              out  with  a  minus  sign, making rlwrap hold back the
              prompt until it has been cooked ("patient mode"). This
              will  prevent flashing of the prompt, but it will also
              interfere with long output  lines  and  make  switches
              from  direct  to  readline mode less reliable. Default
              timeout: 40 ms

       -W, --polling
              EXPERIMENTAL: Wake up every timeout  millisecs,  where
              timeout   is  the  same  as  for  the  -w  (--wait-be‐
              fore-prompt) option, 40 ms by default. This is used to
              sense  the  slave's  interrupt character and ISIG flag
              and to adjust stdin's terminal  settings  accordingly,
              even before you press a key. Try this option e.g. when
              CTRL-C acts differently on  command  with,  and  with‐
              out, rlwrap.

       -z, --filter filter
              Use  a  filter  to change rlwrap's behaviour. A filter
              can be used to keep certain input out of the  history,
              to  change  the  prompt, to implement simple macros or
              programmable completion.. rlwrap comes with a perl and
              a  Python  3  module to make filter writing easy. (cf.
              RlwrapFilter(3pm) for the perl module, the python  one
              is  very  similar) A number of example filters are in‐
              stalled in the  directory   /usr/share/rlwrap/filters.
              "rlwrap  -z  filter" displays information about a fil‐
              ter, "rlwrap -z listing" lists all currently installed
              filters.   If filter needs arguments, you should quote
              the whole filter command line:

                  rlwrap -z 'filter args' command ...
                  rlwrap -z 'pipeline filter1 ... : filter2 ... : ...' command ...

              If  this command line contains  shell  metacharacters,
              rlwrap passes it to the system shell for parsing.

EXAMPLES
       Run nc (netcat) with command-line editing and history
          rlwrap nc

       Wrap  smbclient  (which uses readline itself), keep passwords
       out of the history and don't wrap commands launched from smb‐
       client (like more)
          rlwrap -aPassword: -N smbclient //PEANUT/C

       Wrap  gauche  (a Scheme interpreter) with a bold blue prompt,
       enable multi-line editing (using .scm as filename  extension)
       and  don't  consider  single  quotes  as  quotes (so that the
       parentheses in e.g. (print 'q) match)
          rlwrap -pBlue -m -M .scm -q'

       Get a list of all currently installed filters
          rlwrap -z listing

       Get help for the filter pipeto
          rlwrap -z pipeto

       Wrap sqlite3, use the pipeto filter to be able  to  pipe  the
       output  of  SQL  commands  through grep and/or less, complete
       (case-insensitively) on the SQL keywords in 'sql_words'
          rlwrap -a -z pipeto -i -f sql_words sqlite3 contacts.db

       In a shell script, use rlwrap in 'one-shot'  mode  as  a  re‐
       placement for read
          order=$(rlwrap -pYellow -S 'Your    pizza? ' -H   past_or‐
          ders -P Margherita -o cat)

DIRECT MODE AND READLINE MODE
       Most simple console commands  put  your  terminal  either  in
       "cooked"  or  in "raw" mode. In cooked mode the terminal will
       wait until you press the ENTER key before handing the  entire
       line  to  the  program,  in  raw  mode every key you press is
       handed down immediately. In cooked mode you generally can use
       the  backspace  key, but not the arrow keys, to edit your in‐
       put. Most simple console commands use  cooked  mode  whenever
       they want whole input lines, and raw mode when they want sin‐
       gle keypresses. More sophisticated commands tend to  use  raw
       mode all the time; they may sometimes be rlwrappable with the
       -a (and -N) options.

       When you rlwrap command, rlwrap will run it a in  a  separate
       session, under its own (controlling) "pseudo-terminal" (pty),
       and monitor this pty to see whether  it  is  in  raw,  or  in
       cooked  mode.  In  the first case, rlwrap will copy all input
       and output directly between command and your  terminal  ("di‐
       rect  mode"). In the second case, rlwrap will use readline to
       edit your input ("readline mode"), and monitor command's out‐
       put  -  every  last line that doesn't end with a newline is a
       potential prompt. How it handles such a candidate prompt  de‐
       pends on its being in "patient" or "impatient" mode:

PATIENT AND IMPATIENT MODE
       If  command  writes  a  lot of output, it tends to be written
       (and read) in "chunks". Not all chunks will end with  a  new‐
       line,  and  we need to distinguish their last lines from real
       prompts, especially if we want to re-write ("cook")  prompts.
       rlwrap  solves  this  (almost) by waiting a little, to see if
       there is more to come. "A little" is 40 msec by default,  but
       this  can  be  changed  with  the -w option.  Normally rlwrap
       writes the suspected prompt as soon as it  is  received,  re‐
       placing  it with a "cooked" version after the wait time. This
       is called "impatient" mode. If you don't  like  the  flashing
       effect  (which can become annoying when you "cook" the prompt
       heavily) you can put rlwrap in "patient mode" by   specifying
       a negative value with -w (e.g. -w -40). Rlwrap will then hold
       back the prompt and only print if after cooking.

COOKING PROMPTS
       If and when rlwrap decides that it has a prompt, it will per‐
       form  a  number  of actions on it, depending on the given op‐
       tions: filtering (-z), substituting (-S) and colouring  (-p),
       in  this order. The resulting "cooked" prompt is then printed
       (after erasing the "raw" prompt, if necessary)

SPECIAL KEYS AND BINDABLE COMMANDS
       Control + O
              Accept the current line, but don't put it in the  his‐
              tory  list.  This  action  has a readline command name
              rlwrap-accept-line-and-forget

       Control + ^
              Use an external editor (see  RLWRAP_EDITOR  below)  to
              edit  the current input (this will only work if the -m
              option is set). This action  has  a  readline  command
              name  rlwrap-call-editor

       (Not currently bound)
              Any  key  can be bound to the readline command rlwrap-
              direct-keypress. This key will then always be sent di‐
              rectly  to command,  even when rlwrap is not in direct
              mode.

       (Not currently bound)
              Any key can be bound to the readline  command  rlwrap-
              hotkey.  This  key  will  then cause the current input
              line and the current history to be filtered  (cf.  Rl‐
              wrapFilter(3pm))  through the current filter (hence be
              a no-op when there is no filter), which then  can  re-
              write  the  input line, move the cursor and update the
              history. After that, the user can still edit  the  re‐
              sulting input.

       (Not currently bound)
              rlwrap-hotkey-without-history   acts   like    rlwrap-
              hotkey, but the history (which can be quite large)  is
              not  passed  to  the filter. This is more efficient if
              the filter wouldn't do anything useful with  the  his‐
              tory anyway.

       The  special  keys  were chosen for no other reason than that
       they  are not currently bound to any readline action. If  you
       don't  like them, (or your window manager swallows them) they
       (and the other 3 commands) can be re-bound more  sensibly  by
       including lines like the following in your ~/.inputrc:

          "\M-\C-m": rlwrap-accept-line-and-forget         # ESC-ENTER to accept but keep out of history
          "\C-xe":   rlwrap-call-editor                    # CTRL-x e to edit (multi-line) input in editor of your choice
           $if erl                                         # (only) for the Erlang shell:
              "\C-g": rlwrap-direct-keypress               # pass CTRL-g directly to enter 'user switch' command
           $endif
           "\C-y": rlwrap-hotkey-without-history            # CTRL-y to filter input line (and e.g. insert X selection)

       cf.  the  readline(3) manpage. (NB: take care to not use keys
       that are already caught by the terminal driver, like  CTRL+S,
       as rlwrap will never see those)

ENVIRONMENT
       RLWRAP_HOME:
              directory  in  which  the history and completion files
              are kept.

       RLWRAP_EDITOR (or else EDITOR, or else VISUAL):
              editor to use for multi-line input  (and  rlwrap-edit-
              history). Example:

           export RLWRAP_EDITOR="vi +%L"
           export RLWRAP_EDITOR="vim '+call cursor(%L,%C)'"
           export RLWRAP_EDITOR="emacs +%L:%C %F"

       The  first  example  above  is the default; %L and %C are re‐
       placed by line and column numbers corresponding to the cursor
       position  in  rlwrap's edit buffer, %F is replaced by name of
       the (temporary) file.  If %F is not used, this  name  is  put
       after the (expanded) $RLWAP_EDITOR

       RLWRAP_FILTERDIR:
              Any  executable  along your PATH can in theory be used
              as a filter, but because  filters  have  to  follow  a
              rather  outlandish  protocol (cf. RlwrapFilter (3)) it
              is a good idea to keep them separate. This is why  rl‐
              wrap adds a special filter directory in front of $PATH
              just before launching a filter. By  default,  this  is
              /usr/share/rlwrap/filters,  but  $RLWRAP_FILTERDIR  is
              used if set.

SIGNALS
       A number of signals are forwarded to command:  HUP  INT  QUIT
       USR1  USR2  TERM  and (by way of resizing command's terminal)
       WINCH. Some care is taken to handle TSTP (usually a result of
       a  CTRL-Z  from  the  terminal) sensibly - for example, after
       suspending rlwrap in the middle of a  line  edit,  continuing
       (by  typing  'fg')  will land you at the exact spot where you
       suspended it.

       Filters that take more than 1 second to respond can be inter‐
       rupted  by  a  CTRL-C from the terminal (although rlwrap will
       not survive this)

       If command changes the keystrokes that send a particular sig‐
       nal  from the keyboard (like emacs, which uses CTRL-G instead
       of CTRL-C) rlwrap will do the same (but only after  the  next
       keystroke  -  use  the  --polling  option to make rlwrap more
       transparent in this respect)

       When command is killed by a signal, rlwrap will clean up, re‐
       set its signal handlers an then commit suicide by sending the
       same signal to itself.  This means that your shell  sees  the
       same exit status as it would have seen without rlwrap.

REDIRECTION
       When  the  standard  input  is  not a terminal, editing input
       doesn't make sense, so rlwrap will  ignore  all  options  and
       simply execute command. When stdout (or stderr) is not a ter‐
       minal, rlwrap will re-open it to /dev/tty (the  users  termi‐
       nal)  after it has started command,  so that command's output
       is redirected as expected, but keyboard input and rlwrap  er‐
       ror messages are still visible.

       The  upshot  of  this  is that rlwrap command behaves more or
       less like command when redirecting.

EXIT STATUS
       non-zero after a rlwrap error, or else command's exit status.
       rlwrap  will  always leave the terminal in a tidy state, even
       after a crash.

FILES
       rlwrap expects its  history  and  completion  files  in  $RL‐
       WRAP_HOME, but uses .dotfiles in the user's home directory if
       this variable is not set. This will quickly become  messy  if
       you use rlwrap for many different commands.

       $RLWRAP_HOME/command_history, ~/.command_history
              History  for  command  (remember  that  command may be
              overridden by the --command-name (or -C) option)

       $RLWRAP_HOME/command_completions, ~/.command_completions
              Per-user completion  word  list  for  command.  rlwrap
              never  writes  into  this list, but one can combine -l
              and -f options to to simulate the effect of a  -r  op‐
              tion that works across invocations.

       /usr/share/rlwrap/completions/command
              System-wide  completion  word  list  for command. This
              file is only consulted if the per-user completion word
              list is not found.

       $INPUTRC, ~/.inputrc
              Individual  readline initialisation file (See readline
              (3) for its format). rlwrap sets its application  name
              to  command (this can be overridden by the -C option),
              enabling different behaviours for different  commands.
              One could e.g. put the following lines in ~/.inputrc:

                 $if coqtop
                     set show-all-if-ambiguous On
                 $endif

              making  rlwrap  show  all completions whenever it runs
              coqtop

BUGS and LIMITATIONS
       Though it is flexible, delivers the goods (readline function‐
       ality),  and adheres to the Unix "many small tools" paradigm,
       rlwrap  is a kludge. It cannot know anything about  command's
       internal  state, which makes context-sensitive completion im‐
       possible. Using the readline library from within  command  is
       still the best option.

       Also, because "it takes two to tango" there is no way for rl‐
       wrap to synchronise its internal state with command,  result‐
       ing in a number of subtle race conditions, where e.g. command
       may have changed the state of its terminal before rlwrap  has
       read command output that was written before the state change.
       You will notice these races especially on a busy machine  and
       with heavy "cooking" and filtering, when suddenly (and unpre‐
       dictably) promtps or command output  are  garbled  or  incor‐
       rectly coloured.

       rlwrap  can try, but often fails to, handle prompts that con‐
       tain control characters.  A filter may be used  to  clean  up
       the prompt.

VERSION
       This manpage documents rlwrap version 0.43

AUTHORS
       The  readline  library  (written by Brian Fox and Chet Ramey)
       does all the hard work behind the  scenes,  the  pty-handling
       code  has  been  taken practically unchanged from rxvt-2.7.10
       (currently maintained by Geoff C. Wing), and completion  word
       lists  are  managed by Damian Ivereigh's libredblack library.
       The few remaining lines of code  were  written  by  Hans  Lub
       (hanslub42@gmail.com).

SEE ALSO
       readline(3), RlwrapFilter(3pm)

                            July 19, 2016                  rlwrap(1)
